# ES1090 + UAT978

To use one Raspberry Pi with multiple dongles for 1090 and 978Mhz, we have to assign unique numbers to each dongle.

Instructions from [How-to Serialize Dongles for ES1090 + UAT978 (FlightAware)](https://discussions.flightaware.com/t/how-to-serialize-dongles-for-es1090-uat978/48147)

## 1 - How to Change Serial Number of Dongles

Basically it is done by following command: `rtl_eeprom -s [desired_serial_number]`

### 1.1 - Prepare

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install rtl-sdr

sudo systemctl stop piaware dump1090-fa dump978-fa
```

### 1.2 - Serialize dump1090-fa dongle

Serialization is done one dongle at a time.
Lets start with serializing dump1090-fa dongle.

Plugin the dump1090-fa dongle, and unplug all other dongles.
Give following command:

`rtl_eeprom -s 00001090`

The last line of output generated will be: \
`Write new configuration to device [y/n]?` \
Press y then press Enter  key.

Put a sticker on dongle and write the serial number you have assigned

### 1.3 - Serialize dump978-fa dongle

Unplug dump1090-fa dongle, and plugin dump978-fa dongle, and give this command

`rtl_eeprom -s 00000978`

The last line of output generated will be: \
`Write new configuration to device [y/n]?` \
Press y then press Enter key.

Put a sticker on dongle and write the serial number you have assigned

### 1.4 - Un-plug, then re-plug both dongles, and REBOOT

### 1.5 - After reboot, issue following command to check that serial numbers have actually changed to desired values:

`rtl_test -t`

And that's all!

## 2 - BACKGROUND INFO

### 2.1 - Options to identify a dongle

There are two numbers by which dongle is identified by a decoder software:

#### 2.1.1 - The device number

The device number is assigned by the computer. If there is only one dongle plugged-in, it is assigned device number `0`. If two dongles are plugged-in, one is assigned device number `0` and the other device number `1`.  In case of two dongles, which one gets number `0` and which one get number `1` is randomly decided by the computer.

#### 2.1.2 - The serial number

This is the number saved in memory (eeprom) of the dongle, and is NOT randomly decided by the computer. It is an eight-digit number. Generally factory default for serial numbers is `00000000`. This number however can be changed by user and saved in dongle's `eeprom` memory.

### 2.2 - Best way to identify a dongle
When using 2 dongles and 2 decoders (1090 & 978), the best way to identify dongles is to identify these by serial number. This considts of following two steps:

#### 2.2.1 - Change factory assigned default number

In both dongles, change `00000000`, by two different 8-digit serial numers. For example, one dongle is given number 0000011 or 00000101, and the other 00000012 or 00000102.

**NOTE:**

(a) Please do NOT use serial numbers 00000000, 00000001, or 00000002, 00000003 etc, as it will conflict with device numbers 0, 1, 2, 3.

(b) Do not assign a two or three digit number like  14 or 112. Instead use its 8-digit version 00000014 or 00000112.
